---
title: "Starting Up and Winding Down in 6 Months: A Retrospective (Part 1)"
author: Ian Tan
---	
Starting a venture-backed company has been a long-held ambition of mine. At the end of 2021, together with two former co-workers from [Zilliqa](https://www.zilliqa.com/), I decided to act on my ambition. We ideated, came up with a product, and began the fund raising process. By April, we had successfully raised a US$1m pre-seed round to build Voyage Finance, which was intended to be a decentralised credit facility for blockchain gamers.

Unfortunately, a series of events and decisions, both internal and external, created a set of circumstances in which our product and company ceased to be commercially viable. With no product-market fit (PMF) and dwindling runway with no hope of fresh funds in a post-FTX world, we discontinued the product we had built for the past year. Half the team, myself included, departed. Although the company still lives in principle and commendably continues to work on a proof of concept for ERC-4337, the the original problem we set forth to solve, and the product we built to that end, no longer exists.  

Failure is never easy to swallow. However, I've learned innumerable lessons from my time as a founder. This essay is the first in a series of retrospectives that crystallise the lessons I've learned from this journey, which I hope will serve as a lesson to aspiring founders -- and my future self. Since covering everything in a single post would lead to it becoming far too long, this maiden instalment seeks to provide a context and background for later instalments, where I hope to cover, in greater detail, the concrete lessons we learned from our journey.

# Fixing X-to-Earn

The Voyage flagship was a credit product built for the GameFi niche. For the uninitiated, GameFi was a category of blockchain-enabled "games" that were, in some capacity, NFT-gated. That is, only players that possessed the correct NFTs were able to participate in and earn the all-important tokens that could be sold on the open market. I have included two qualifications: first, I use the past tense because GameFi is, at this point, dead for all intents and purposes. Secondly, most of the "games" were, arguably, entirely unenjoyable.

Nevertheless, despite these shortcomings, between 2020-2021, GameFi as a concept had gained a significant amount of attention, particularly in emerging markets such as the Philippines, where a not-insubstantial number of people were [earning a living by grinding/farming SLP](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/05/14/people-in-philippines-earn-cryptocurrency-playing-nft-video-game-axie-infinity.html), the game currency of Axie Infinity -- one-time VC darling and the poster child of GameFi. As the value of AXS (the Axie Infinity governance token) and SLP soared, a slew of copies and imitators with different branding, lore and communities launched. However, despite cosmetic differences, they all shared the same underlying mechanism: participants used NFTs in order to complete certain mundane tasks, and were rewarded with an amount of cryptocurrency such as SLP.

Collectively, this category came to be known as X-to-Earn (X2E). With the level of froth and mania market participants experienced, it wasn't long before capitalism birthed a new and exploitative business model to extract value from this new-fangled paradigm. Groups of investors began to organise, sometimes as less formal Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAO), and in other cases full-blown venture-backed companies. Collectively, they went on to raise hundreds of millions of dollars, often from **retail investors** through Liquidity Bootstrapping Pools (LBP) -- legally questionable token offerings -- with such guilds as [Merit Circle raising $105,576,956 over 72 hours](https://meritcircle.gitbook.io/merit-circle/merit-circle-usdmc/merit-circle-usdmc/token-distribution#e6fa). Even smaller guilds like Singapore-base [Salad Ventures raised US$15m.](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/salad-ventures)

Like a duck taking to water, guilds began to monopolise NFT supply, the "tickets" a player -- known as a Scholar -- needed to participate in games, and farm tokens. Their business model was extremely simple, and while the music played on, highly profitable. NFTs were loaned out to Scholars who traded their time for a financial reward, typically 30-50% cut of tokens earned through gaming activity. Although some Guilds paid fixed salaries, fundamentally, they all had the same business model. To borrow from Marx -- they controlled the means of production (NFTs), and extracted rent (a cut of farmed tokens) from the labour of workers (Scholars). 

This had some very undesirable consequences for Scholars and game economies. First, participants had no incentive to stick around. They participated only for financial compensation, and were entirely uninvested in any other way. Secondly, the hording of NFTs in the hands of a handful of large Guilds caused NFT prices to sky rocket. Players were effectively locked out of ownership, defeating the fundamental goal of an open economy and settlement layer to begin with. Problematically, Guilds often added no other value other than a simple payroll system. Their objective was simply to keep players on the hamster wheel. Once a game turned unprofitable, they abandoned it in search of greener pastures to plunder.

If that sounds like rent seeking to you, you're right. Voyage aimed to solve that problem by making the model more equitable. We thought we had a solution: offer a credit line to players, who would then be able to buy NFTs and play to repay their debt with their earnings. Once repaid, they would fully own the NFTs in question. This was inspired by my time at GoJek Finance, where GoJek drivers could purchase essentials on credit, and would then repay their loans out of their earnings on a daily basis.

We hypothesised that our product would redistribute NFT ownership into the hands of players, incentivising them to continue participating meaningfully in their chosen economies. Players would get to keep more of the earnings, as interest rates could safely be kept under ~30% APR. Guilds would have to provide players fairer terms and add more value than rudimentary on/off-ramping. Players would also be disincentivised from indiscriminately dumping those tokens, as this would cause a deterioration of their earnings' value. This would buy time for game developers to build more sophisticated economic mechanisms, such as sufficient token sinks, in order to increase the longer-term viability of their projects. Voyage seemed like a viable path to sustainable blockchain gaming. 

# Skeumorphism and X-to-Earn Economics

In seeking to "fix" X-to-Earn, we had made a critical, and fatal, underlying assumption. It was that X-to-Earn economies would eventually be approximately as self-sustaining as MMO economies. From the outset, many in the crypto community questioned the ability of X-to-Earn to sustain their upward trajectory. After all, the NFTs that players bought -- and the rewards they earned using them -- were both minted out of thin air. They were not, in any way, linked to meaningful economic output, although the same can be said of almost every crypto-asset today. To most, the financial success of Axie Infinity and its investors seemed like financial alchemy rather than a game, many of which were not particularly enjoyable. That thousands of Scholars were effectively earning a living from it was and still is unthinkable to most.  

Yet, despite these reservations, Millenials who grew up during the golden age of MMOs (Everquest, World of Warcraft) know that virtual economies can and do in fact become highly sophisticated. For a long time, World of Warcraft [provided gold farmers with a viable source of income](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gallery/2009/mar/05/china-virtual-worlds) from time-strapped gamers who wanted to participate in end-game content but could not or were not willing to invest the hours. For those who did have time on their hands, Auction Houses provided an open medium for exchange, allowing players to sell the items they won or crafted in an open marketplace. In other instances, items were simply traded OTC, either for game currency or (illegally) real world money. 

We were optimistic. There was a precedent, and therefore reason to believe X-to-Earn could emulate the same success. The cynics won this one. The key difference between World of Warcraft (WoW) and X-to-Earn, is that WoW Gold had intrinsic in-game value, whereas the main objective of earning SLP was financial profit in fiat terms. A hardcore WoW raider back in the day needed gold to buy mounts, craft potions, and repair armour. As such, the dollar value of WoW Gold was ancillary to its main purpose, in-game progression. By contrast, SLP was exclusively farmed to be swapped to ETH, or more commonly a stablecoin, to enable Guilds to pay its Scholars and return a yield to investors. If not, it was used to "breed" NFTs -- a means of conjuring up more golden tickets from thin air -- only for those to eventually be dumped for ETH or USD. 

This meant that X-to-Earn was effectively a rehash of DeFi Summer's yield farms, albeit with rudimentary graphics and some form of gamification. As more players piled in, the dollar value of game currencies and NFTs rose. However, growth curves inevitably flatten. Virtually every blockchain game that launched between 2021 and 2022 -- [Pegaxy](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/bonk), [Crabada](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/treasure-under-sea), [Cyball](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/cybloc-battery-token), [StepN](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/stepn) -- followed the same peak-and-crash trajectory. At risk of oversimplifying, the fundamental difference was that demand for WoW Gold was endogenous, while demand for SLP was exogenous. The former enabled a virtuous cycle of participation in the game economy while the latter incentivised purely mercenary, extractive behaviour. In retrospect, it was naive to believe that GameFi would turn out any differently to the rest of the industry. 

# All-in

I have thus far omitted a material fact. Voyage was not going to launch onto Axie Infinity, but [Crabada](https://www.crabada.com/) -- a conceptually similar idle game that had been gaining traction in the [Avalanche](https://www.google.com/search?q=avalanche+ecosystem&oq=avalanche+ecosystem&aqs=chrome.0.0i512l5j0i22i30l5.2235j1j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8) ecosystem throughout the second half of 2021. When we started working on Voyage, the price of a single NFT was outrageously high at approximately US$4,500. To play, a player needed **three** crabs, totalling an absurd US$13,500! Since the Crabada team was willing to support us, we decided to commit to it. The catch was that, in order to launch a minimally viable product (MVP) for it, we had to build three key components:

* Full-blown lending protocol -- the core component that managed liquidity and the NFT escrow mechanism
* Browser extension for players
* Web app for lenders to deposit and withdraw tokens

When we started work in April 2022, the goal was to launch by August 2022 -- a development cycle of about 4 months. While such a timeline is common in the web3 space, given the unforgiving and irreversible nature of blockchain transactions, that was a key mistake. We had failed to size our bet appropriately. For a concept that was completely untested (NFT-backed financing), the bet was too big, as we had a runway of approximately 18 months. Accounting for additional inertia in the event of a pivot if it failed, the cost would have come up to approximately 6 months. 

In May 2022, UST, Do Kwon's experimental and financially questionable (to put it mildly) "stablecoin", lost its peg and entered a death spiral. This wiped billions of dollars of value off the crypto ecosystem, and later resulted in the crash of Three Arrows Capital (3AC). In combination, these events turned the mood in the crypto community from risk-on to risk-off. This caused the GameFi ecosystem to crash beyond repair. By June, the price of an NFT in Crabada was a fraction of its all-time high. The price of its in-game currency, TUS, was approaching zero as investors dumped the tokens en masse. 

By then, we were already two months into development, and about 75% done. We agonised over whether or not to discard the work and pivot, or persist in hopes of a recovery.  Unfortunately, we chose to persist well into July. By this time, we had sunk **three months** into development. We had placed an outsized bet on a contender, which made it difficult to ignore the sunk cost. A better approach would have been to prove the concept with a stripped-down and unscalable product with a one-month development time. This would have de-risked development and eased a pivot, improving our survivability.

# Doubling Down

By July, our team had finally decided to pivot. When we finally decided to fold, we knew we would be forced to rethink key mechanisms and smart contract design decisions, which would require us to discard a large chunk of the work we had already done. To simplify things, our prospects came down to two options:

1. Discard *all* work and pivot into a completely different category; or,
2. double down on our niche, but generalise the product for all NFTs categories -- including art and profile pictures.

Due to sunk cost fallacy and the illusion of liquidity created by NFT mania in 2021, we took the second option. This was the third, and arguably most crucial product-related mistake we made. For starters, it was not a pivot in any rigorous sense of the word -- we had simply abandoned one niche in favour of a slightly bigger one. However, since we already had some reusable work, we felt it would be sensible to take the course that we did. In retrospect, discarding all prior work and performing a full pivot out of the NFT space into a more bear market-resistant category would have been the better call.

We soldiered on. My co-founders and I rewrote large swathes of our protocol's specification, and we re-engineered our web extension to work on popular NFT marketplaces instead of games. By mid-October, within 3 months, we had a working product and started to test the application on mainnet with friends and investors who gamely agreed to be our guinea pigs -- on their on dime no less -- who I will always remember and treasure.

Unfortunately, by this time, NFT liquidity itself had begun to dry up, with floor prices on large collections starting to come down dramatically. Top collections faced such serious downward price action that shortly before FTX collapsed, BendDAO, one of the largest NFT liquidity protocols, [faced its first liquidity crunch](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-08-23/nft-lender-seeks-to-ease-liquidity-crisis-with-protocol-changes) when the floor price of BAYC trended down precipitously. With no buyers to take the other side of liquidation auctions, [BendDAO had to be bailed out by generous whales](https://governance.benddao.xyz/t/proposal-for-establish-a-sub-treasury-named-non-performing-assets-investment-fund/151).

Although BendDAO eventually survived and is still operational today, the writing was already on the wall. Every single one of our competitors -- [Cyan](https://dapp.usecyan.com/#/bnpl), [MetaStreet](https://www.metastreet.xyz/power-sweep), [Teller](https://teller.org/) -- had no traction to show for. Other competitors, such as [Halliday](https://halliday.xyz), which had [raised significant funds](https://techcrunch.com/2022/08/04/buy-now-play-later-nfts-metaverse-halliday-bags-6m-in-seed-round-led-by-a16z/), have still not launched their products, while Teller appears to have discontinued their NFT offerings. Voyage faced the same fate. However, unlike our competition, we had raised US$1m; a princely sum by any measure -- ask any start up founder -- but not enough for an unprofitable start up with no traction to survive a protracted crypto winter, and rebuild in time for summer.

# Shutting Down

As fate would have it, just weeks after our beta launched, FTX collapsed. Multiple VCs we had spoken had either been wiped out, or opted to sit on the sidelines. NFT liquidity all but disappeared, making it a risky proposition for any lender to rely on floor price oracles, including Voyage. With rates rising and staying high for the foreseeable future, the product was no longer viable for investors, lenders and borrowers alike. As our already slim hopes of raising fresh funds or gaining meaningful PMF vanished with SBF's net worth, we made the decision to shut down the product. 

We introduced deep pay cuts, with our CEO foregoing remuneration completely. One co-worker had to be let go. With the financial and mental health risk of persistence in face of an industry with a history of recalcitrance and volatility no longer palatable, other members of the team, myself included, parted ways with the company, while the remaining -- already all-in on crypto -- opted to experiment with a fresh roadmap until funds run out.  

Succeeding in the crypto space is like catching lightning in a bottle. Market cycles and accompanying volatility are unpredictable, while narratives change with the seasons, leading to a high level of difficulty in building a sustainable and lasting business. Shutting down a product and leaving a team you committed your entire heart and soul to for any length of time is a painful experience. That said, the quality of lessons learned has made it all worth it. Even though we failed, I'm still immensely proud of our team and the product we managed to build in the time we had. Given a chance, I would do it all over again -- although admittedly probably not in crypto this time.
